# CirSeq Analysis
Circular Sequencing (CirSeq) is an NGS method based on RNA circularization allowing sequencing of several copies of the initial RNA molecule, permitting assembly of a consensus and increasing accuracy and sensitivity compared to standard Illumina[^1]. 

This folder contains tools written to analyze data generated using our customized version of CirSeq.

## Contents
* [Realign indels](#realign-indels)
    * [Overview](#overview)
    * [Dependencies](#dependencies)
    * [Usage](#usage)
    * [Demo](#demo)
* [References](#references)

## Realign indels
This script takes the SAM file containing alignments of consensuses to the reference generated by the [CirSeq](https://github.com/ashleyacevedo/CirSeq) pipeline and extracts insertion and deletion (indel) frequencies.

### Overview
#### UMI detection
The reverse-transcription primer used in our protocol contains a stretch of 10 random nucleotides forming a unique molecular identifier (UMI). This UMI is found by aligning the primer to the start of the read using [Edlib](https://github.com/Martinsos/edlib). Reads without UMI or suspected to be PCR duplicates are discarded.

#### Screening out contaminants
Contaminants can be removed from the data in two ways. First, a blacklist can be provided, containing IDs of suspected contaminant reads to be discarded. Second, reads that have a high number of indels or have a single insertion and a single deletion in close proximity are discarded, as they often result from [Bowtie2](https://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2/index.shtml) (used in the [CirSeq](https://github.com/ashleyacevedo/CirSeq) pipeline) trying to maximize alignment score for contaminants with highly similar sequences.

#### Calculating indel frequencies
Reads are screened for indels and for each indel, all possible alignments to the reference are identified. During this step, position-by-position coverage is calculated. Indels are then positioned according to the most stable predicted RdRp-trapping RNA structure (using the same approach as [Slidingfold](/slidingfold/)) that would be able to generate this indel according to our trapped-RdRp model. Once realigned, frequencies are obtained by dividing the count by the coverage at the position.

### Dependencies
Realign indels was written using Python 3.9 on MacOS 14.0 and uses the following software (all avaible via conda):
* [ViennaRNA](https://github.com/ViennaRNA) for RNA structure prediction (using version 2.4.18)
* [Biopython](https://biopython.org/) for wrangling sequence files (using version 1.79)
* [Edlib](https://github.com/Martinsos/edlib) for UMI finding (using version 1.2.3)

Install time should be less than a minute if you know how to use conda.

### Usage
This script requires a lot of inputs which usually do not need to be changed much, so I never bothered to make them providable via arguments, sorry! Paths to the input file simply have to be inserted into the script. The version uploaded here contains paths compatible with the demo data provided (see [Demo](#demo) below).

The input files needed and the line where the path is specified are:
* ```line 33``` A file defining which samples should be analyzed. For each sample it requires a name and then at least one combination of run ID and barcode ID, separated by a colon. These elements have to be tab-separated. E.g.: ```RETR    run1:barcode1  run2:barcode1``` defines the sample called RETR with two replicates. Lines starting with ```#``` will be skipped. Run and barcode identifier are treated as strings and thus don't need to be numbers.
* ```line 40``` A file containing a path to the reference (in fasta format) for each sample defined in the first file. These must be the same references used for the CirSeq pipeline! Each line is tab-separated and contains the name followed by the path. E.g.: ```RETR /Users/User/Data/NGS/resources/refs/H5-RETR.fasta```
* ```line 45``` A file containing the UMI-containing primer for each sample defined in the first file. UMIs are identified by a stretch of Ns, the number corresponding to the length of the UMI. Each line is tab-separated and contains the name followed by the primer sequence. E.g.: ```RETR  TGTAAAACGACGGCCAGTNNNNNNNNNNCAAACAGATTAGTCCTTGCAACAGG```

* ```lines 51-66``` Beyond the above files which are the same for all samples, we also need a number of paths which vary by sample. Since we all have different ways of organizing our data, these are wrapped in a function taking the run ID and barcode ID as input. There are three input paths to fill in here:
    + ```line 56``` The path to the gzipped SAM file containing alignments of consensuses to reference
    + ```line 58``` The path to the gzipped reads in FASTQ format (needed to identify UMIs)
    + ```line 60``` The path to the blacklist file containing IDs of reads to discard. This file can be empty in which case no reads will be discarded

For output files, 2 paths need to be specified:
* ```lines 26-27``` A prefix and suffix used to generate the output files containing indel frequencies. The prefix and suffix will be joined with ```insertions``` or ```deletions```, creating one file for each type. The prefix has to contain at least the path to the output folder and the suffix should contain at least the file extension. These files hold the extracted indels and are tab-separated with the following fields (see ```demo/output/insertions_demo.tsv``` for an example):
    
    1. Sample name
    2. Replicate number
    3. Run ID
    4. Barcode ID
    5. Size of indel
    6. Position of indel
    7. Sequence of indel
    8. Orientation of indel
    9. Type of indel
    10. Count of occurences
    11. Frequency per 1000 reads
* ```lines 51-66``` There is one sample-specific output file path to define:
    + ```line 64``` The file the coverage for this sample should be written for. This generates a tsv with position/coverage pairs for each position of the reference.

### Demo
The ```demo/input/``` folder contains sample input files (corresponding to a 10000 sequence subset of both replicates of the NL<sub>RETR</sub> and NL<sub>RKKR</sub> samples from Funk et al 2024) that should allow you to test run the script. Simply download the input folder, set your working directory to this folder, then run using:

```python cirseq_realign_indel.py```

The ```demo/ouput/``` contains the expected output files. Please note that the references used here are in vRNA orientation. Running the demo should take less than a minute.

### Reproducing data from Funk et al
NGS data for Funk et al. is available at the ENA under accession number [PRJEB71774](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/PRJEB71774). 

## References
[^1]: A. Acevedo, R. Andino, [Library preparation for highly accurate population sequencing of RNA viruses](http://www.nature.com/articles/nprot.2014.118). Nat. Protoc. 9, 1760–1769 (2014).